# The Analytical Language of John Wilkins

By Jorge Luis Borges

---

I have verified that the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica omits the article on John Wilkins. This omission is justified if we remember the triviality of the article (twenty lines of mere biographical circumstances: Wilkins was born in 1614, Wilkins died in 1672, Wilkins was chaplain to Charles Louis, an Italian prince; Wilkins was appointed rector of one of the Oxford colleges, Wilkins was the first secretary of the Royal Society of London, etc.). It is culpable if we consider Wilkins' speculative work. He abounded in happy curiosities: theology, cryptography, music, the manufacture of transparent beehives, the course of an invisible planet, the possibility of a voyage to the moon, the possibility and principles of a universal language interested him. To this last problem, he dedicated the book "An Essay Towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language" (600 quarto pages, 1668). There are no copies of that book in our National Library. To write this note, I have consulted "The Life and Times of John Wilkins" (1910) by P.A. Wright Henderson, "Woerterbuch der Philosophie" (1924) by Fritz Mauthner, "Delphos" (1935) by E. Sylvia Pankhurst, and "Dangerous Thoughts" (1939) by Lancelot Hogben.

At some point, we have all suffered through those inescapable debates where a lady, with a stockpile of interjections and anacoluthons, swears that the word "luna" is more (or less) expressive than the word "moon". Apart from the obvious observation that the monosyllabic "moon" may be more apt to represent a very simple object than the disyllabic "luna", there is nothing to contribute to such debates; discounting compound words and derivations, all the languages in the world (without excluding Johann Martin Schleyer's Volapük and Peano's romantic Interlingua) are equally inexpressive. There is no edition of the Royal Academy's Grammar that does not extol "the envied treasure of picturesque, felicitous, and expressive words of the extremely rich Spanish language," but it is merely a boast, without corroboration. For starters, that same Royal Academy produces a dictionary every so often, which defines the words of the Spanish language... In the universal language conceived by Wilkins in the middle of the 17th century, each word defines itself. Descartes, in a letter dated November 1629, had already noted that through the decimal numbering system, we can learn in a single day to name all quantities up to infinity and write them in a new language, which is that of numerals; he also proposed the formation of an analogous, general language that would organize and encompass all human thoughts. John Wilkins, around 1664, undertook that enterprise.

He divided the universe into forty categories or genres, which could then be subdivided into differences, which in turn could be further subdivided into species. He assigned to each genre a two-letter monosyllable; to each difference, a consonant; to each species, a vowel. For example: "de" means element; "deb," the first of the elements, fire; "deba," a portion of the element of fire, a flame. In Letellier's analogous language (1850), "a" means animal; "ab," mammal; "abo," carnivore; "aboj," feline; "aboje," cat; "abi," herbivore; "abiv," equine; etc. In Bonifacio Sotos Ochando's (1854), "imaba" means building; "imaca," seraglio; "image," hospital; "imafo," lazaretto; "imarri," house; "imaru," villa; "imedo," post; "imede," pillar; "imego," floor; "imela," roof; "imogo," window; "bire," bookbinder; "birer," to bind. (I owe this last census to a book printed in Buenos Aires in 1886: the Course of Universal Language, by Dr. Pedro Mata).

The words of John Wilkins' analytical language are not clumsy arbitrary symbols; each of the letters that compose them is meaningful, just as the letters of the Sacred Scripture were for the Kabbalists. Mauthner notes that children could learn this language without knowing that it is artificial; later in school, they would discover that it is also a universal key and a secret encyclopedia.

Having defined Wilkins' procedure, there remains a problem of impossible or difficult postponement: the value of the quadragesimal table that forms the basis of the language. Let's consider the eighth category, that of stones. Wilkins divides them into common (flint, gravel, slate), modest (marble, amber, coral), precious (pearl, opal), transparent (amethyst, sapphire), and insoluble (coal, chalk, and arsenic). Almost as alarming as the eighth is the ninth category. This reveals to us that metals can be imperfect (cinnabar, quicksilver), artificial (bronze, brass), recremental (filings, rust), and natural (gold, tin, copper). Beauty appears in the sixteenth category; it is a live-bearing, oblong fish. These ambiguities, redundancies, and deficiencies remind us of those that Dr. Franz Kuhn attributes to a certain Chinese encyclopedia entitled Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge. In its distant pages, it is written that animals are divided into (a) belonging to the Emperor, (b) embalmed, (c) tamed, (d) suckling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f) fabulous, (g) stray dogs, (h) included in this classification, (i) that shake as if they were mad, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very fine camel hair brush, (l) etcetera, (m) that have just broken the vase, (n) that from a distance look like flies. The Brussels Bibliographic Institute also practices chaos: it has parceled the universe into 1000 subdivisions, of which 262 correspond to the Pope; 282, to the Roman Catholic Church; 263, to the Lord's Day; 268, to Sunday schools; 298, to Mormonism, and 294, to Brahmanism, Buddhism, Shintoism, and Taoism. It does not shy away from heterogeneous subdivisions, for example, 179: "Cruelty to animals. Animal protection. Dueling and suicide from a moral standpoint. Various vices and defects. Various virtues and qualities."

I have noted the arbitrariness of Wilkins, the unknown (or apocryphal) Chinese encyclopedist, and the Brussels Bibliographic Institute; it is notorious that there is no classification of the universe that is not arbitrary and conjectural. The reason is very simple: we do not know what the universe is. "The world," writes David Hume, "is perhaps the rudimentary sketch of a childish god, who left it half made, ashamed of his poor execution; it is the work of a subordinate god, whose superior gods mock; it is the confused production of a decrepit and retired deity, who has already died" (Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, V. 1779). We can go further; we can suspect that there is no universe in the organic, unifying sense that this ambitious word implies. If there is, we lack the conjecture of its purpose; we lack the conjecture of the words, the definitions, the etymologies, the synonyms, of God's secret dictionary.

The impossibility of penetrating the divine scheme of the universe, however, cannot dissuade us from planning human schemes, even though we know these to be provisional. Wilkins's analytical language is not the least admirable of these schemes. The genres and species that compose it are contradictory and vague; the artifice of having the letters of words indicate subdivisions and divisions is undoubtedly ingenious. The word "salmon" tells us nothing; Zana, the corresponding voice; "delfine" (for a person well-versed in the forty categories and in the genres of those categories) is a scaly, river-dwelling fish with reddish flesh. Theoretically, it is not inconceivable to have a language where the man of each being would indicate all the details of their destiny, past, and future.

Hopes and utopias aside, perhaps the most insightful words ever written about language are these from Chesterton: "Man knows that there are in the soul more bewildering, more countless and more anonymous shades than the colors of an autumnal forest... yet he believes that these shades, in all their blends and transformations, can be accurately represented by an arbitrary mechanism of grunts and shrieks. He believes that from the interior of a stockbroker, sounds actually emerge that signify all the mysteries of memory and all the agonies of longing" (G.F. Watts, page 88, 1904).

---

_Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)._
